GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 1 GISC4317/EPPS4317 Course Syllabus Course Information Course Number/Section GISC4317/EPPS4317 Course Title Introductory Programming for Social and Geospatial Science Term Fall 2024 Professor Contact Information Professor Dr. Bryan Chastain Office Phone 972-883-2517 Email Address chastain@utdallas.edu Office Location GR 3.412 Office Hours Tuesdays 6:00 – 7:00 PM or by appointment Other Information We will use eLearning for this class. Please contact me through eLearning for all class related issues. Teaching Assistant Haitao Lyu, Haitao.Lyu@utdallas.edu Office Hours: Tuesdays 10:00 AM – noon or by appointment Course Pre-requisites, Co-requisites, and/or Other Restrictions Either GISC2305 – Introduction to Spatial Thinking or GEOG3304 – Principles of Geographic Information Systems is recommended but not required. Course Description This course provides general introduction to GIS automation, including GIS object-based model design and computer programming languages, such as Python, and their application in GIS related project development. Topics covered include fundamental data structures and algorithms, user-interface design, component object model, and database management. Emphasis is on rapid application development with hands-on experiences. Student Learning Objectives/Outcomes At the end of this course, students will be able to: • Understand fundamental programming concepts and basic programming skills • Conduct application customization and build batch mode application models in a geoprocessing framework. • Use various methods to access and process GIS data at the individual object level. Suggested Course Materials • Gawron, J. M. 2016. Python for Social Science. Available online at: https://gawron.sdsu.edu/python_for_ss/course_core/book_draft • Pilgrim, M. 2011. Dive into Python 3. Available online at: http://www.diveintopython3.net/ Textbooks and some other bookstore materials can be ordered online or purchased at the UT Dallas Bookstore.

GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 2 Technical Requirements In addition to a confident level of computer and Internet literacy, certain minimum technical requirements must be met to enable a successful learning experience. Please review the important technical requirements on the Getting Started with eLearning webpage. Course Access and Navigation This course can be accessed using your UT Dallas NetID account on the eLearning website. Please see the course access and navigation section of the Getting Started with eLearning webpage for more information. To become familiar with the eLearning tool, please see the Student eLearning Tutorials webpage. UT Dallas provides eLearning technical support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The eLearning Support Center i ncludes a toll -free telephone number for immediate assistance (1-866-588-3192), email request service, and an online chat service. Communication This course utilizes online tools for interaction and communication. Some external communication tools such as regular email and a web conferencing tool may also be used during the semester. For more details, please visit the Student eLearning Tutorials webpage for video demonstrations on eLearning tools. Student emails and discussion board messages will be answered within 3 working days under normal circumstances. Distance Learning Student Resources Online students have access to resources including the McDermott Library, Academic Advising, the AccessAbility Resource Center, and many others. Please see the eLearning Current Students webpage for more information. Server Unavailability or Other Technical Difficulties The University is committed to providing a reliable learning management system to all users. However, in the event of any unexpected server outage or any unusual technical difficulty which prevents students from completing a time sensitive assessment activity, the instructor will provide an appropriate accommodation based on the situation. Students should immediately report any problems to the instructor and also contact the online eLearning Help Desk. The instructor and the eLearning Help Desk will work with the student to resolve any issues at the earliest possible time.

GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 3 Academic Calendar WEEK/ DATES TOPIC/LECTURE ASSESSMENT / ACTIVITY DUE DATE 8/20 Introduction to the course Lab 0 8/27 Interactive Notebooks & Introduction to Python Lab 1: employing Python to automate simple tasks 9/3 Python Language Fundamentals Lab 2: applying fundamental Python to report retirement financial goals 9/10 Python Language Fundamentals (continued) Lab 3: utilizing Python to arrange and describe lists of student information 9/17 Working with functions, modules and packages Lab 4: using Python functions to reduce code redundancy 9/24 Scientific & tabular data Lab 5: examining tabular data using numpy & pandas 10/1 Data visualization Lab 6: data vizualization using matplotlib & altair 10/8 Midterm Project - No Lecture! Conducting analyses with Python

GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 4 WEEK/ DATES TOPIC/LECTURE ASSESSMENT / ACTIVITY DUE DATE 10/15 Graphical User Interface Design Lab 12: fundamental GUI design using pyqt 10/22 Working with spatial data Lab 7: preparing web maps using ArcGIS API for Python 10/29 Working with spatial data (continued) Lab 8: generating geospatial data with Python 11/5 Pulling data from the Web: APIs & webscraping Lab 9: gathering data from the Web using requests and BeautifulSoup 11/12 Introduction to the GeoProcessing Framework & Model Builder Lab 10: using Model Builder to identify crime patterns 11/19 Version Control Lab 11: managing changes in source code via Git 11/26 No Class – Fall Break 12/3 Final Presentations Due 12/10 Final Project Due

GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 5 Grading Policy • 35% Laboratory Exercises • 30% Midterm Project • 35% Final Group Project 93-100 points = A; 90-92 points = A- 87-89 points = B+; 83-86 points = B; 80-82 points = B- 77-79 points = C+; 73-76 points = C; 70-72 points = C- 67-69 points = D+; 63-66 points = D; 60-62 points = D- 59 and below = F Course Policies Make-up exams No Make-up project will be given without a legitimate excuse accompanied by proper formal documentation (e.g., a doctor’s excuse). Extra Credit TBD Late Work Late submission for labs will be penalized 10% per day late Special Assignments TBD Class Attendance The University’s attendance policy requirement is that individual faculty set their course attendance requirements. Regular and punctual class attendance is expected. Students who fail to attend class regularly are inviting scholastic difficulty. In some courses, instructors may have special attendance requirements; these should be made known to students during the first week of classes. Class Participation Regular class participation is expected regardless of course modality. Students who fail to participate in class regularly are inviting scholastic difficulty. A portion of the grade for this course is directly tied to your participation in this class. It also includes engaging in group or other activities during class that solicit your feedback on homework assignments, readings, or materials covered in the lectures (and/or labs). Class participation is documented by faculty. Successful participation is defined as consistently adhering to University requirements, as presented in this syllabus. Failure to comply with these University requirements is a violation of the Student Code of Conduct. Texas Senate Bill 17, the recent law that prohibits diversity, equity, and inclusion programs and activities at public universities in Texas, does not in any way apply to academic course instruction. Students should not feel the need to self-censor or limit their participation in academic courses pertaining to topics of race and racism, structural inequality, LGBTQ+ issues, or diversity, equity, and inclusion, and related topics.

GISC4317 Course Syllabus Page 6 Class Recordings Students are expected to follow appropriate University policies and maintain the security of passwords used to access recorded lectures. Unless the AccessAbility Resource Center has approved the student to record the instruction, students are expressly prohibited from recording any part of this course. Recordings may not be published, reproduced, or shared with those not in the class or uploaded to other online environments except to implement an approved AccessAbility Resource Center accommodation. Failure to comply with these University requirements is a violation of the Student Code of Conduct. The instructor may record meetings of this course. These recordings will be made available to all students registered for this class if the intent is to supplement the classroom experience. If the instructor or a UTD school/department/office plans any other uses for the recordings, consent of the students identifiable in the recordings is required prior to such use unless an exception is allowed by law. Comet Creed This creed was voted on by the UT Dallas student body in 2014. It is a standard that Comets choose to live by and encourage others to do the same: “As a Comet, I pledge honesty, integrity, and service in all that I do.” Accommodations for Students with Disabilities Please review the section within the UT Dallas Syllabus Policies and Procedures webpage. Academic Support Resources Please visit the Academic Support Resources page to view the University’s academic support resources for all students. UT Dallas Syllabus Policies and Procedures Please visit the Syllabus Policies page to view the University’s policies and procedures segment of the course syllabus. Please review the catalog sections regarding the credit/no credit or pass/fail grading option and withdrawal from class. The descriptions and timelines contained in this syllabus are subject to change at the discretion of the Professor.

